---
layout: post
title:  "glibc linker namespace"
date:   2019-06-17
categories: Linux
---

*glibc* provides a very powerful function `dlmopen`, allows user to load dynamic shared objects (DSOs) into a new isolated namespace[1].
The application still loads the DSOs it depends (or `DT_NEEDED`), as a result, they're multiple copies of DSOs, loaded into the same address space.
However, because the abstraction provied by `dlmopen`, they're logically isolated. Which also means the symbol resolving in the new linker namspace
won't across the namesapce boundry, maybe except symbols within `ld-linux.so`. Same as `dlopen`, the handle returned is a pointer to 
`struct link_map`, iterating over the `link_map` shows `ld-linux.so` has a `NULL` load address without `_DYNAMIC` section.

Why it useful? you might ask? There're some cases we might need to inject our own DSO (using `LD_PRELOAD` for example), at the same time discriminate
its dependencies (`libc.so`, `libpthread.so`, etc..). An alternative approach would be creating a free standing DSO; however it is a lot more
complicated and restricted. For instance, the free standing DSO cannot have anything related to `pthreads`, nor thread local storage (TLS), because
it almost impossible to mantain binary compatibily with two different *libc* implementation, even the same *libc* with different versions. This could
be devastating for language like `rust`, `rust` `libstd` embraces `tls` heavily, even without any explicit threads, even worse, many of `rust` types, 
their `drop` might also call `pthread_destroy*` implicitly. I believe that could be the reason why `x86_64-linux-unknown-musl`
 (has `+static-crt`) cannot produce `cdylib` (unless for the musl host toolchain) crate type[2].

It becomes more interesting if we combine `dlmopen` with `LD_PRELOAD`. `LD_PRELOAD` itself has nothing to do with linker namespace, however,
we can make a small *loader*, just to be `LD_PRELOAD`-ed, then in the very *loader*, call `dlmopen` to actually load the DSO we're interested (`dlmopen` also loads all its dependencies)
into a new (linker) namespace; so it could be used as a *better* `LD_PRELOAD`; though I'm not quite very whether or not this is the intended use-case 
for `dlmopen`; it is a quite useful trick, with our DSO and its dependencies loaded into different regions, we can do fancy stuff, such as create seccomp-bpf rules just for those regions, 
while still using the same system shared libraries, without worrying clobber the DSOs loaded for the application.

[1] [glibc linker namespace](https://sourceware.org/glibc/wiki/LinkerNamespaces)

[2] [rust musl cydlib](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/statically-compile-musl-a-dynamic-library-cdylib/17497/2?u=wangbj)
